Besturingssystemen.md, before:


Raw data GPT


#### How large is the header?
- Kijken naar Header Size (length = 4 dus 2 HEX)

```
- Header Size = 5C000000
- 5C000000 -> HEX MET LENGTH 4 = 5C
- 5C HEX = 92 DECIMAL 
```

#### How large is a single partition entry?
- Kijken naar Size of Single Partition Entry (length l_= 4 dus 2 HEX)

```
- Size of Single Partition Entry = 80000000
- 80000000 -> HEX MET LENGTH 4 = 80
- 80 HEX = 128 DECIMAL
```

#### How many partition entries are there?
- Kijken naar Partition Entry Count

```
- Partition Entry Count = 80000000
- 80000000 -> HEX MET LENGTH 4 = 80
- 80 HEX = 128 DECIMAL
```

#### How much space do all partition entries require?
- Single partition entry * Partition Entry Count

```
- 128 * 128
- UITKOMST IN DECIMAL
```

#### First usable LBA for partitions?
- Kijken naar First Usable LBA for Partitions

```
- First Usable LBA for Partitions = 2200000000000000
- 2200000000000000 MET LENGTH 8 = 0022
- 22 HEX = 34
```

#### Last usable LBA for partitions?
- Kijken naar Last Usable LBA for Partitions

```
- Last usable LBA for partitions = DE4F000000000000
- DE4F000000000000 MET LENGTH 8 = (0000)4FDE
- 4FDE HEX = 20446 DECIMAL
```

#### Number of blocks available for partitions
### Credits to Bokoloco
```
(Last useable LBA - First Usable LBA) + 1
```

#### Space in bytes usable for partitions?
- Number of blocks available for partitions * size of block

```
20413 * 512 = 10451456
```

#### What is the address of the first block in the partition?
- First LBA * 512

```
2048 * 512 = 0100000
```

#### How large is the partition in bytes?
- (last LBA - first LBA + 1) * 512

```
(20446-2048 + 1) * 512 = 9420288
```

## BOOT SECTOR

#### Bytes occupied by reserved region
Bytes per cluster * sectors occupied by reserved region

```
512 * 8 = 4096
```

#### Bytes per FAT
Bytes per cluster * Sectors per FAT

```
512 * 72 = 36864
```

#### Size of root directory in bytes?
- (last LBA - first LBA + 1) * 512

```
(20446-2048 + 1) * 512 = 9420288
```

#### Size of root directory in bytes ( no clue of dit kan & klopt )
- Aantal bytes (32 bytes) * 512

```
32 * 512 = 16384
```

#### cluster size 
```
sector per cluster * bytes per sector
```

#### Address of first FAT
### Credits to Siebe aka Chepte 
- "The first FAT directly follows the reserved region."
```
er zijn 8 sectoren reserved
die zijn elk 0x0200 lang
en dan uw startadres is 0x0100000
8 x 0x0200 is 0x1000
0x0100000 + 0x1000 = 0x101000
```

### Root Directory Size in Bytes
Root Directory Size in Bytes = Number of Possible Root Entries * Directory entry size (usually 32 bytes)

#### Address of root directory
First FAT adres + (aantal FATs * BytesPerFAT) => niet zeker van deze
### Chepte's fix
first fat address + (sectors per fat) * 512

```
101000 + (2 * 36864) HEX = 113000
```

#### Address of data region
rootDirectoryAddress + rootDirectorySize;

```
113000 + 16384 = 117000
```

# Deze zijn van extra oefening 1 maar zelfde principe voor allemaal

#### Cluster Chain (file4.dat)
First FAT address + First cluster * 2 &rarr; AFHANKELIJK AANTAL BITS

```
100800 (HEX) + 6995 (36A6 IN HEX) * 2 =  0x0103EA6
```
&rarr; Op dat adres staat volgende getal in cluster chain (little endian omzetten)

#### File contents (file4.dat)
Start of region data + (laatste van cluster chain - 2) + cluster size

```
108000 (HEX) + (3439 - 2) (DEC) * 2048
```
&rarr; laatste 4 bytes nemen van file content

#### Total Size of FAT16 Volume in bytes ( extra exercise 1 )
small number of sectors * sector size 

```
28672 * 512
```

### Credits to chepte voor images

![afbeelding](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/71447000/120071478-edf45080-c08f-11eb-9095-cb61bf6f396b.png)


![afbeelding](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/71447000/120071562-4b889d00-c090-11eb-9251-b099c59d166f.png)

Commit message:

OEFENING 2 FILE RAW BYTES VINDEN

Besturingssystemen.md, after:


Raw data GPT


#### How large is the header?
- Kijken naar Header Size (length = 4 dus 2 HEX)

```
- Header Size = 5C000000
- 5C000000 -> HEX MET LENGTH 4 = 5C
- 5C HEX = 92 DECIMAL 
```

#### How large is a single partition entry?
- Kijken naar Size of Single Partition Entry (length l_= 4 dus 2 HEX)

```
- Size of Single Partition Entry = 80000000
- 80000000 -> HEX MET LENGTH 4 = 80
- 80 HEX = 128 DECIMAL
```

#### How many partition entries are there?
- Kijken naar Partition Entry Count

```
- Partition Entry Count = 80000000
- 80000000 -> HEX MET LENGTH 4 = 80
- 80 HEX = 128 DECIMAL
```

#### How much space do all partition entries require?
- Single partition entry * Partition Entry Count

```
- 128 * 128
- UITKOMST IN DECIMAL
```

#### First usable LBA for partitions?
- Kijken naar First Usable LBA for Partitions

```
- First Usable LBA for Partitions = 2200000000000000
- 2200000000000000 MET LENGTH 8 = 0022
- 22 HEX = 34
```

#### Last usable LBA for partitions?
- Kijken naar Last Usable LBA for Partitions

```
- Last usable LBA for partitions = DE4F000000000000
- DE4F000000000000 MET LENGTH 8 = (0000)4FDE
- 4FDE HEX = 20446 DECIMAL
```

#### Number of blocks available for partitions
### Credits to Bokoloco
```
(Last useable LBA - First Usable LBA) + 1
```

#### Space in bytes usable for partitions?
- Number of blocks available for partitions * size of block

```
20413 * 512 = 10451456
```

#### What is the address of the first block in the partition?
- First LBA * 512

```
2048 * 512 = 0100000
```

#### How large is the partition in bytes?
- (last LBA - first LBA + 1) * 512

```
(20446-2048 + 1) * 512 = 9420288
```

## BOOT SECTOR

#### Bytes occupied by reserved region
Bytes per cluster * sectors occupied by reserved region

```
512 * 8 = 4096
```

#### Bytes per FAT
Bytes per cluster * Sectors per FAT

```
512 * 72 = 36864
```

#### Size of root directory in bytes?
- (last LBA - first LBA + 1) * 512

```
(20446-2048 + 1) * 512 = 9420288
```

#### Size of root directory in bytes ( no clue of dit kan & klopt )
- Aantal bytes (32 bytes) * 512

```
32 * 512 = 16384
```

#### cluster size 
```
sector per cluster * bytes per sector
```

#### Address of first FAT
### Credits to Siebe aka Chepte 
- "The first FAT directly follows the reserved region."
```
er zijn 8 sectoren reserved
die zijn elk 0x0200 lang
en dan uw startadres is 0x0100000
8 x 0x0200 is 0x1000
0x0100000 + 0x1000 = 0x101000
```

### Root Directory Size in Bytes
Root Directory Size in Bytes = Number of Possible Root Entries * Directory entry size (usually 32 bytes)

#### Address of root directory
First FAT adres + (aantal FATs * BytesPerFAT) => niet zeker van deze
### Chepte's fix
first fat address + (sectors per fat) * 512

```
101000 + (2 * 36864) HEX = 113000
```

#### Address of data region
rootDirectoryAddress + rootDirectorySize;

```
113000 + 16384 = 117000
```

# Deze zijn van extra oefening 1 maar zelfde principe voor allemaal

#### Cluster Chain (file4.dat)
First FAT address + First cluster * 2 &rarr; AFHANKELIJK AANTAL BITS

```
100800 (HEX) + 6995 (36A6 IN HEX) * 2 =  0x0103EA6
```
&rarr; Op dat adres staat volgende getal in cluster chain (little endian omzetten)

#### File contents (file4.dat)
Start of region data + (laatste van cluster chain - 2) + cluster size

##### Note: Start of Region Data = Data Region Address in Boot Sector

```
108000 (HEX) + (3439 - 2) (DEC) * 2048
```
&rarr; laatste 4 bytes nemen van file content

#### Total Size of FAT16 Volume in bytes ( extra exercise 1 )
small number of sectors * sector size 

```
28672 * 512
```

#### OEFENING 2 FILE RAW BYTES VINDEN

```
(first cluster -2 ) * Size of Cluster in Bytes:
```

### Credits to chepte voor images

![afbeelding](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/71447000/120071478-edf45080-c08f-11eb-9095-cb61bf6f396b.png)


![afbeelding](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/71447000/120071562-4b889d00-c090-11eb-9251-b099c59d166f.png)
